The prime minister of India is the head of government of the Republic of India.
 In practice, ordinarily, and effectively, executive authority is vested in the prime minister and their chosen Council of Ministers, though the president of India is the constitutional, nominal, or ceremonial head of state.
 The prime minister is often the leader of the party or the coalition with a majority in the lower house of the Parliament of India, the Lok Sabha, which is the main legislative body in the Republic of India.
 The prime minister and their cabinet are at all times responsible to the Lok Sabha. 
 The prime minister is appointed by the president of India; however the prime minister has to enjoy the confidence of the majority of Lok Sabha members, who are directly elected every five years, lest the prime minister shall resign.
 The prime minister can be a member of the Lok Sabha or of the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the parliament.
 The prime minister unilaterally controls the selection and dismissal of members of the Council of Minister; and allocation of posts to members within the government.
 The council, which is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha as per Article 75(3), assists the president regarding the operations under the latter's powers; however, by the virtue of Article 74 of the Constitution, such 'aid and advice' tendered by the council is binding.
 The prime minister ranks third in the order of precedence.
 The longest-serving prime minister was Jawaharlal Nehru, also the first prime minister, whose rule lasted 16 years and 286    days.
 His premiership was followed by Lal Bahadur Shastri's short tenure and Indira Gandhi's 11- and 4-year-long tenures, both politicians belonging to the Indian National Congress.
 After Gandhi's assassination, her son Rajiv took charge until 1989, when a decade with six unstable governments began.
 This was followed by the full terms of Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Manmohan Singh, and Narendra Modi.
 Modi is the 14th and current prime minister of India, serving since 26/05/2014.